# Don't be disrupted a Strategy for IT Enabled Information Capability

*Indicate Submission Type: Completed Research Paper*

## Introduction

IT-enabled Information Management Capability (IMC) enables firms to respond rapidly to changing market needs, supports digital transformation and reconfiguration of business through enabling easier decisions, facilitates flexibility to fulfill more customers' needs without incurring extra cost, and provides a technological platform for expanding the business. The strategic use of information has already enabled digital firms such as Amazon, Alibaba, and Facebook to implement new business models, which have deeply influenced the structures of their industries. However, the abundance of data, privacy regulations, and security threats are now compelling firms to rethink how to best utilize IMC.

The API (Application Programming Interface) concept predates computing and the web and is as old as computing itself. APIs have served as an entry point into a system, so the system's functionality can be used. In a web context, APIs are ways of making services available over the internet in an easy-to-use way. This ability to share functionality and data over the web provided building blocks whereby bits of functionality can be combined into larger interconnected capabilities. Think of these APIs as Lego blocks that build the foundation of your imagination.

Today's digital economy is built on Web APIs which opens the possibility of how business can be built and reconfigured. For brands that are looking to leverage APIs to expand their services into the digital economy they must identify the data and service vacancies in the market and expose the valuable currency (your data) and have a good understanding of managing APIs and a sensible API strategy that allows a firm to participate in the API economy. You see companies leveraging services from docusign to bring in digital form creation and digital signature to transform their in-person and web signature-based onboarding processes. You also see companies leveraging health startups that provide intelligent services and data to accelerate development of vaccine through genetic testing from companies like Helix that provide insight Web APIs that provide access to data on users' genetic traits.

The ProgrammableWeb directory passed 22,000 public web APIs and this growth has been accelerating since 2005. Although the concept of building for reuse (building a capability once) seems intuitive, large enterprises continue to struggle to encapsulate these capabilities across organization boundaries, manage the discovery, usage (usability) and evolution of these Web API assets. Web APIs (application program interfaces) are the ways that software talks to other software (over web protocols) that enable developers to leverage data and functions to build new products and services. Look at any mobile application, they exist primarily because they can leverage capabilities made available through third-party Web APIs. Take a ride-sharing application that leverages the Google Maps API for navigation, payment API to facilitate paying for the ride. Harvard Business Reviews (January 2015) states that Salesforce generates 50% of its revenue (currently 17.1 billion USD 2020) through APIs.

The economical return on investment compounds with each new consumer, however many organizations have yet to fully embrace this opportunity due to the traditional project-based (just in time development of APIs) with siloed (point-to-point) integration remaining the rule. Legacy applications that were not designed to cleanly expose data and business logic in the form of Web APIs. Web APIs are becoming the center piece to enterprise modernization strategies and with the increasing pressure to deliver new digital capabilities across the value chain (external consumers, partners, and internal consumers) we need a taxonomy that increases our ability to leverage capabilities across organizational boundaries, principles that support the evolvability of an API, methods that aid in the discovery of APIs in a digital platform that enables a mall-map experience to rapidly reconfigure and enterprise.

Modern companies are architecting and designing their technology as technology building blocks intended to be reused which is recognized as a key attribute in improving software productivity and quality. Looking back as successful industrial revolutions we find that modularity and interchangeable components key to the strategy. This same growth and digital revolution is powered in the technological world through digital platforms. The organizations that will succeed in their digital transformation will be the ones that solve for these digital building blocks that support discoverability and interoperability in this burgeoning API economy. Companies will realize the critical role that Web APIs play in innovation and modernization of their ecosystem.

Prior research in information systems has explored three areas relevant to API and the value creation process. First, several studies suggest API and economic value creation process through a lens of software reuse to increase software development productivity and quality while at the same time decrease costs (Panagiotou et all, 2010 & Morisio, 2002). Second, studies have suggested that Web APIs have emerged as the prominent paradigm for the development of distributed software systems as they provide the potential for software to be modularized in way that the functionality can be described, discovered and deployed in a platform independent manner over a network and that they are the main asset of this intellectual capital (Bell, 2007 & Panagiotou, 2011). However, a gap remains in the existing literature in linking the anatomy of APIs to the value of co-creation. We further extend this view of software reuse to include Web APIs and leverage an attribution method to understand the behavior of the engineers, provide a shared language and discovery approach grounded in SD logic so that "they expand actor-to-actor networks beyond their temporal, organizational, and spatial boundaries".

We ask the research questions: 
1. How can the anatomy of APIs influence knowledge sharing in a digital platform at an interorganizational level?
2. How will a mechanism for discovery of Web APIs influence value co-creation for an organization?

In this study include both quantitative and qualitative data gathered concurrently. We will leverage a survey oriented mixed methods SD logic design in which value propositions will provide an overarching framework for the study and lead to methods that aid in the discovery of Web APIs as a service to empower organizations. The survey questions will be based on attribution theory to understand the causal influences that lead to explore the behaviors related to Web API reuse to understand how individuals interpret the reasoning for the importance of leveraging these capabilities in the enterprise. Furthermore, service-dominant-logic (SDL) will be leveraged to provide key insights into the intangible resources of Web APIs and the value of reuse in an organization. This lens will explore knowledge sharing across the dimensions of SDL (organization level, representation level and provisional layer) to provide strategic insights into co-creation that can be leveraged to motive and support reuse in a large enterprise firm. Successful Web API reuse is not only contingent on having the right resources (Web APIs), taxonomy (anatomy of the API); practices for discovery and co-creating these capabilities into attractive value-in-use propositions are also needed within a digital platform.

The quantitative data will be used to test the theory that predicts that an aid of discovery of Web APIs will influence positively the value of co-creation (variable) for software engineers (participant) at a Large firm (research site). The qualitative data will explore the attribution struggle of large enterprise to encapsulate these capabilities across organizational boundaries (phenomena) for software engineers across verticals (participants) at a Large insurance provider (research site).

The two forms of data will be combined to highlight the challenges in enterprise reuse of Web APIs and argue for argue for:
1. The creation of a service taxonomy (anatomy of an API) that provides a language to understand the intent of an API in an ecosystem
2. Principles in the design of a service to support evolvability of the Web APIs
3. A method for gaining strategic advantage through aiding in information management capabilities in support of the API economy. 

Just like the assembly lines ushered in an era of mass production; Web APIs provide the key building blocks to reconfigure the enterprise.

These results are in conformance with prior studies on reuse, however this is the first study, to our knowledge, to align the concepts of reuse with both attributional theory and service-dominant logic as a theoretical lens to validate the models of success in Web API reuse. Of central importance are the effects of attributions on Web API reuse and how co-creation can be leveraged to motive and support Web API reuse in a large enterprise firm. The key insight we develop is Web API service reuse must be conducted with the lens of how co-creation and value propositions are evaluated from the perspective of the consumers' value creation, and actions that influences the antecedents to produce positive organizational outcomes. This contributes to value co-creation literature and provides tangible technology-enabled value co-creation aimed at the digital transformation building blocks of Web API.

## Literature Review

Software reuse is recognized as the key attribute in improving software productivity and quality. Morisio notes that failure factors include non-awareness and commitment from management (Morisio, 2002). They further note that changes in high level design to account for availability of assets, adding in new processes to drive the identification of reusable assets, addressing human factors through awareness events and finally setting up a repository. We believe in understanding the underlying attributes of the behavior and providing self-service discovery will address the awareness condition noted by Morisio et al.

Bell expands the definition in that "Web services have emerged as the prominent paradigm for the development of distributed software systems as they provide the potential for software to be modularized in way that the functionality can be described, discovered and deployed in a platform independent manner over a network" (Bell, 2007). Web services as defined by the W3C as a software system designed to support interoperate machine-to-machine interaction over a network. Its interface describes in a processable format (specifically WSDL). Defined here the web service is SOAP-messages based on Service Oriented Architecture. Modern Web APIs tend to leverage an OpenAPI specification and leverage the HTTP protocol to send data in JSON or XML formats. Bell, et al (2007) develop a service discovery architecture to assist in semantic discovery and knowledge discovery. The semantic web we were promised has yet to be delivered, however this paper does provide an OWL ontology for describing services which influences the Web API taxonomy developed in this paper which we believe provides a more complete model in communicating the opportunity, audience and further details related to data classification and data residency concerns that were not part of these earlier research papers.

Panagiotou, et al. (2011) states "the main asset of a software organization consists of its intellectual capital", and they take a knowledge management theoretical lens and again the promise of a semantic web in solving this knowledge communication and coordination problem. The promise of applying semantic web technologies to include reusability and extensibility, and even enhanced discovery. We do agree with Panagiotou that "there is a need for managing knowledge in software development".

Although the semantic-based knowledge system is based on libraries this concept can be expanded to Web APIs described in a Swagger or OpenAPI specification and instead leverage natural language processing to extract key words to determine existing services and even identify similar services that exist within a large enterprise providing a map to opportunities of reuse within the enterprise. We agree that "individual knowledge has to be shared and leveraged at a project and organization level, and this is exactly what knowledge management proposes" (Panagiotou, et. al), we believe that making discovery, awareness and guidelines for Web API development will provide a positive outcome on a firm's ability to drive improvement in over reuse across the organization.

While knowledge management efforts in the software development domain traditionally involved technical initiatives such as knowledge repositories, experience factories, and lessons-to-learn databases, there is a growing appreciation in the software community of the role of developers' personal knowledge networks in software development (Balijepally & Nerur, 2019). As noted by this research "It is not uncommon for software developers to scour the Internet---blogs, technical forums and list serves, among others--- to acquire problem-specific knowledge (Assimakopoulos & Yan, 2006). Knowledge management (KM) systems, where available, could serve as valuable sources of information relating to business processes, or the technology domain." (Balijepally & Nerur, 2019). We agree with VenuGopal in the criticality of knowledge exchange which is at the heart of this expanded research into a IT digital platform to support discovery and co-creation to meet there ever increasing demands on software development in large enterprise. We further share the appreciation of the criticality of knowledge exchange and believe this research furthers insights into how a knowledge management can address the behavior and provide not only knowledge transfer but the ability to co-create across organizational boundaries.

Sugathan et al. (2018) uses attribution theory to explain theoretical relationships and tests hypothesis in experiments to stimulate co-creation. Like Sugathan et al. we look to understand the effect of co-creation on attribution however rather than link attribution to the failure of co-creation with customers we leverage attribution theory to link the antecedents to motivate co-creation with Web APIs within the firm across organizational boundaries.

## Theory Background

### Attribution Theory

Attribution theory is concerned with how individuals perceive events and how it relates to their thinking and behavior. An attribution is a causal explanation for a behavior. To illustrate, if a developer observes a colleague duplicate existing functionality, they are likely to try to form an attributional explanation of this behavior. The observer might conclude that their colleague is poorly trained (attributing the behavior to skills). The theory assumes that people try to determine why people do what they do (attribute causes behavior). The qualitative analysis will leverage the research paradigm of social psychology to understand the casual dimensions of behavior across (1) locus of control (the source internal or external), (2) stability (ability), (3) controllability (can influence); Weiner et al. (1971).

Research shows that people attribute success internally (the source is internal), and failure externally (to the firm). The success or failure factors may be controllable or uncontrollable and we look to understand the controllable factors that will alter or influence a positive impact on Web API reuse.

Weiner (1985) states that attribution theory holds that attributions for these behaviors and outcomes help to shape emotional and behavioral responses. Attributions can help us identify and avoid the behaviors through the causal factors that caused them. The Attribution-Emotion-Behavior process is depicted below.

| **Stability** | **Locus of control** |                |
|---------------|----------------------|----------------|
|               | Internal             | External       |
| Stable        | Ability              | Task difficulty|
| Unstable      | Effort               | Luck           |

*Table: Weiner et al (1971)*

Kelly and Michela (1980) clearly define the elements of attribution research. First the investigator has a concept of the explanations of the behavior. Second a hypothesis about the antecedents of the cause. Finally, the investigator has a hypothesis of the subject making a particular attribution.

Within the context of co-creation, the explanation of the behavior is more observable to the API developer that is creating duplicate Web APIs and who is involved in the creation of the product or service. Within the locus of control, we look at the API producers who have the ability and skills necessary to create and co-create Web APIs so that the operant resource such as effort and skills are controlled.

### Co-Creation

Service Dominant Logic holds that firms offer value propositions, that value is co-created during interactions, and that value is subjectively determined by the customer in context (Edvardsson et al. 2011; Vargo and Lusch 2008a). The basic premise is that it entails the creation of value for each other by two or more entities across the producer and consumer markets. In this paper we look at the enterprise services produced and consumed at the company, business unit or team.

**SDL Premises**

- FP1 - Service is the fundamental basis of exchange.
- FP4 - Operant (knowledge and skill) resources are the fundamental source of strategic benefit.
- FP6 - Value is cocreated by multiple actors, always including the beneficiary. (service-oriented view)
- FP9 - All social and economic actors are resource integrators.

Service for service exchange (FP1) is inherently learning and knowledge discovery focused; it is through this interaction between actors (service-benefit and service-providing) where they learn about the nature of the value in their exchange.

These premises imply, that value is co-created by multiple stakeholders (consumer and producer). Therefore, the value creation process is the process of consuming and interaction, which is dependent on the operant (FP4) (knowledge or awareness of the service), which is uniquely reliant on the ability to for actors to be resource integrators (FP9). Hence customer value created can be defined as the reuse of a service, which companies have to maximize by providing a service-oriented view of cocreation through established methods of discovery, taxonomy and practice for integrating these capabilities (FP6).

S-D logic and its core concept of value co-creation have been influential in theorizing IS phenomena (Srivastava, 2015). S-D logic offers new, distinctive philosophical assumptions about economic exchange, the fourth stream of research promotes S-D logic and value co-creation as a theoretical lens to study various IS phenomena, and value co-creation holds that actors integrate resources through service exchange which is configured by institutional arrangements through which service ecosystems endogenously emerge (Blaschke, 2018).

As Lusch and Vargo (2014) state knowledge, the most critical of all resource, is applied to other potential resources to create "resourceness", and when applied can provide service to benefit other actor (or the actor themselves). Furthermore, information technologies and the digital revolution, including the spread of the Internet, enable more and more actors and resources to be connected and more easily integrated (Lusch and Vargo, 2014). Three factors are noted to drive this trend: open standards, connectivity and network ubiquity. In this case to address the knowledge, skills and leverage rapid business transformation we argue for the need of consistent language to enable actors to develop and share rules, connectivity to allow actors to engage in the cocreation of service, and network ubiquity in the discovery to enable service-to-service exchange. It is through collaborative communication, learning that promotes discovery of Web APIs for integration and enhanced creation possibilities through more effective leverage of technology.

